.TH LSUPD "8" "July 2023" "lsupd\-0.90" LSUPD
.SH NAME
lsscsi \- list USB-C Power Delivery objects
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lsupd
[\fI\-\-caps\fR] [\fI\-\-help\fR] [\fI\-\-json[=JO]\fR]
[\fI\-\-js\-file=JFN\fR] [\fI\-\-sysfsroot=PATH\fR]
[\fI\-\-verbose\fR] [\fI\-\-version\fR] [\fIFILTER ... \fR]
[\fIH:C:T:L\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
Despite appearances, this utility has nothing to do with UPDates. The first
part of its name (i.e. "ls") comes from the Unix command name to list
file names (including directories). The trailing "upd" is an abbreviation
of "USB-C Power Delivery". It joins a growing family of "ls" utilities such
as lsblk, lscpu, lsfd, lsmem, lsof, lspci, lsscsi and lsusb.
   ....
.SH OPTIONS
Arguments to long options are mandatory for short options as well. The options
are arranged in alphabetical order based on the long option name. Hyphenated
long options can also take underscore, and vice versa (e.g.
\fI\-\-js\-file=JFN\fR and \fI\-\-js_file=JFN\fR have the same meaning).
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-caps\fR
reduces one line per device output to the tuple and the primary device name.
This may simplify scripts that process the output of this utility. With the
\fI\-\-generic\fR option it will show on each line the tuple (from which
the bsg pass\-through device name can be deduced), the primary device
name (which the block subsystem uses) and the sg device name (also a
pass\-through).
.br
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Output the usage message and exit.
.TP
\fB\-j\fR[=\fIJO\fR], \fB\-\-json\fR[=\fIJO\fR]
output is in JSON format instead of plain text form. Note that arguments
to the short and long form are themselves optional and if present start
with "=" and no whitespace is permitted around that "=".
.br
See the lsupd_json(8) manpage or use '?' for \fIJO\fR to get a summary.
.TP
\fB\-J\fR, \fB\-\-js\-file\fR=\fIJFN\fR
Send the JSON output to a file named \fIJFN\fR instead of stdout. When
this option is given, the \fI\-\-json\fR option is not required unless
JSON settings in \fIJO\fR are needed.
.br
See the accompanying lsscsi_json(8) manpage.
.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-kname\fR
Use Linux default algorithm for naming devices (e.g. block major 8, minor 0
is "/dev/sda") rather than the "match by major and minor" in the "/dev"
directory as discussed above.
.br
Said another way: Linux kernel drivers will create device nodes (Unix
special files under the "/dev" directory) of 'char' or 'block' type
at startup. This allows user programs to access this storage. One such
program called udev has the ability to
.B change
those special change file names which is what the user will see henceforth
apart from sysfs which still uses the original name (i.e. the name soon
after bootup).
.br
This option should be seldom needed.
.TP
\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-list\fR
Output additional information in <attribute_name>=<value> pairs, one pair
per line preceded by two spaces. This option has the same effect as '\-lll'.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-long\fR
Output additional information for each SCSI device (host). Can be
used multiple times for more output in which case the shorter option
form is more convenient (e.g. '\-lll'). When used three times (i.e. '\-lll')
outputs SCSI device (host) attributes one per line; preceded by
two spaces; in the form "<attribute_name>=<value>".
.TP
\fB\-U\fR, \fB\-\-long\-unit\fR
Output logical unit name in full, if available. It replaces the normal
vendor, product and revision strings given in the single logical unit per
line mode. If no logical unit name is found "none" is printed. If the
logical unit name is long (e.g. a UUID) then following fields are pushed
further to the right as required. This option is functionally equivalent to
the '\-uuu' option.
.br
If the option is used twice (e.g. '\-UU') then EUI, NAA, UUID and T10 vendor
ID formats are prefixed by "eui.", "naa.", "uuid." and "t10." respectively.
Note that SCSI name format used by iSCSI should already be prefixed
by 'iqn.'. Using the '\-\-unit' option 4 or more times (e.g. '\-uuuu') will
have the same action as '\-UU'.
.br
\fI\-\-long_unit\fR is also an acceptable form when invoking this option.
.TP
\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-lunhex\fR
when this option is used once the LUN in the tuple (at the start of each
device line) is shown in "T10" format which is up to 16 hexadecimal
digits. It is prefixed by "0x" to distinguish the LUN from the decimal
value shown in the absence of this option. Also hierarchal LUNs are
shown with a "_" character separating the levels. For example the
two level LUN: 0x0355006600000000 will appear as 0x0355_0066. If this
option is given twice (e.g. using the short form: '\-xx') then the full
16 hexadecimal digits are shown for each LUN, prefixed by "0x".
.br
For NVMe, the namespace identifier (nsid) is shown in the "L" position. The
nsid is a 32 bit unsigned quantities with 0x0 and 0xffffffff reserved.
Without this option, the nsid is shown in decimal. When this option is used
once the nsid is output in hex with a lead 0x and with up to 3 leading zeros.
When this option is used twice the nsid is output in hex with up to 7 leading
zeros.
.TP
\fB\-N\fR, \fB\-\-no\-nvme\fR
this option excludes NVMe devices and controllers for the output. This option
may be needed to stop NVMe device output interfering with specific format
output like that produced when the \fI\-\-classic\fR option is used.
.br
To only show NVMe devices, use 'lsscsi N', to only show NVMe controllers,
use 'lsscsi \-H N'.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-pdt\fR
this option displays the SCSI Peripheral Device Type (PDT) in hex preceded
by "0x". For NVME namespaces "0x0' is displayed which corresponds to a
disk ("Direct Access Device" or SSD). In single line output this hex PDT
replaces the device type abbreviation (e.g. "0x0     " replaces "disk    ")
and appears after the tuple.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-protection\fR
Output target (DIF) and initiator (DIX) protection types.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-protmode\fR
Output effective protection information mode for each disk device.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-scsi_id\fR
outputs the udev derived matching id found in /dev/disk/by\-id/scsi* .
This is only for disk (and disk like) devices. If no match is found
then "dm\-uuid\-mpath*" and "usb*" are searched in the same directory.
If there is still no match then the /sys/class/block/<disk>/holders
directory is searched. The matching id is printed following the device
name (e.g.  /dev/sdc) and if there is no match "\-" is output. Note
that only disk (like) devices are matched by this option; so, for
example, a SCSI enclosure will have an identifier of '\-'.
.br
Prior to revision 164 the first match in /dev/disk/by\-id/scsi* was
printed. A change was added at that point to check for identifiers
in a specific order as some are considered "stronger" than others.
See the ORDER OF SCSI IDENTIFIERS section below.
.br
Note that the identifier output is prefixed by one character from this
string: "328S10" to indicate what type of identifier is being shown. Those
values are explained in the ORDER OF SCSI IDENTIFIERS section below.
To show the identifier without that leading value, use \fI\-\-scsi_id\fR
twice (or simply \fI\-ii\fR).
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-size\fR
Print disk capacity in plain text form. When given once, normal base
10 SI units are used as a prefix for 'B' which is bytes (aka octets).
For example MB, GB and TB stand for 10^6, 10^9 and 10^12 bytes
respectively. When given twice, IEC 80000\-3 prefixes for 'B' are used;
for example MiB, GiB and TiB stand for 2^20, 2^30 and 2^40
bytes respectively. The output is rounded to 3 or less significant
figures in order to fit on a single line.
It will also output the size of RBC devices, CD/DVD media and host
managed ZBC disks. Host aware ZBC disks have their "peripheral device
type" set to 0 (the same as normal disks) so their size is output.
.br
If given three times (short form is the more convenient: '\-sss') then
the disk capacity as a logical block count is given. This is an exact
figure in decimal reported by the storage device at discovery. Discovery
is typically just after boot time, or when it was last attached if the
storage device is removable.
.br
To unclutter the single line per device mode the \fI\-\-brief\fR option
combined with this option should help.
.TP
\fB\-y\fR, \fB\-\-sysfsroot\fR=\fIPATH\fR
assumes sysfs is mounted at PATH instead of the default '/sys' . If this
option is given PATH should be an absolute path (i.e. start with '/').
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-sz\-lbs\fR
Print disk capacity as a number of logical blocks (which is the same
as '\-sss'). When used twice a comma is added followed by the logical
block size in bytes. It should be a number like 512 or 4096.
.br
If the logical block size cannot be found (e.g. because the version of
Linux predates the /sys/block/<dev_name>/queue directory) then the number
of 512 byte blocks followed comma and then '512' is output irrespective of
what the true logical block size of the device is. This special case
action occurs whether this option is given one or more times.
.br
To unclutter the single line per device mode the \fI\-\-brief\fR option
combined with this option should help.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-transport\fR
Output transport information. This will be target related information or,
if \fI\-\-hosts\fR is given, initiator related information. When used without
\fI\-\-list\fR, a name or identifier (or both) are output on a single line,
usually prefixed by the type of transport. For devices this information
replaces the normal vendor, product and revision strings. When the
\fI\-\-list\fR option is also given then additionally multiple lines
of attribute_name=value pairs are output, each indented by two spaces. See
the section on transports below.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-unit\fR
Output logical unit name, if available. If this option is given once or
twice, then the 30 character field where the vendor, product and revision
strings are usually placed is expanded to 32 characters and replaced by the
logical unit name. If no logical unit name is found "none" is printed.
The first found of the NAA, EUI\-64 or SCSI name string is output unless a
SCSI name string is found and the associated target port indicates the
iSCSI protocol, in which case the SCSI name string is preferred. Finally
if there is no match on the above and a T10 Vendor ID descriptor is found
then it is used.
.br
If the name cannot fit in the 32 character field then it is truncated to
the right and a trailing '_' character is used to alert the reader to the
truncation. The 32 character width is chosen since that is large enough to
hold 16 byte NAA or EUI\-64 identifiers. However SCSI name strings as used
by iSCSI can be larger than that.
.br
If this option is used twice then this field is also 32 character wide. If
the logical unit name cannot fit then it will be truncated to the left and
a leading '_' character is used to alert the reader to the truncation.
.br
If this option is used three times the whole logical unit name is
output, followed by several spaces.
.br
In order for this option to work, it needs a Linux kernel from and including
3.15 . It accesses the sysfs vpd_pg83 file for the device in question. Old
SCSI and ATA (SATA) equipment may not provide this information. If it is
provided by ATA (SATA) then it will be the WWN.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
outputs directory names where information is found. Use multiple times for
more output.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
outputs version information then exits. If used once outputs to stderr; if
used twice outputs to stdout and shortens the date to yyyymmdd numeric
format. The first number in the version string is the release number.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-wwn\fR
additionally outputs the WWN for disks. The World Wide Name (WWN) is
typically 64 bits long (16 hex digits) but could be up to 128 bits long.
To indicate the WWN is hexadecimal, it is prefixed by "0x". Originally this
option looked at the '/dev/disk/by\-id/wwn\-*' symlinks to scsi devices;
but this was changed to '/dev/disk/by\-id/scsi\-*' as the latter were more
stable (i.e. less likely to change from one boot to the next).
.br
If this option is used twice then the original action takes place. In other
words the '/dev/disk/by\-id/wwn\-*' symlinks to scsi devices are used.
.SH TRANSPORTS
This utility lists SCSI devices which are known as logical units (LU) in
the SCSI Architecture Model (ref: SAM\-5 at https://www.t10.org) or hosts
when the \fI\-\-hosts\fR option is given. A host is called an initiator in
SAM\-5. A SCSI command travels out via an initiator, across some transport
to a target and then onwards to a logical unit. A target device may contain
several logical units. A target device has one or more ports that can be
viewed as transport end points. Each FC and SAS disk is a single target
that has two ports and contains one logical unit. If both target ports
on a FC or SAS disk are connected and visible to a machine, then lsscsi
will show two entries. Initiators (i.e. hosts) also have one or more ports
and some HBAs in Linux have a host entry per initiator port while others
have a host entry per initiator device.
.PP
When the \fI\-\-transport\fR option is given for devices (i.e.
\fI\-\-hosts\fR not given) then most of the information produced by lsscsi
is associated with the target, or more precisely: the target port, through
which SCSI commands pass that access a logical unit.
.PP
Typically this utility provides one line of output per "device" or host.
Significantly more information can be obtained by adding the \fI\-\-list\fR
option. When used together with the \fI\-\-transport\fR option, after
the summary line, multiple lines of transport specific information in the
form "<attribute_name>=<value>" are output, each indented by two spaces.
Using a filter argument will reduce the volume of output if a lot of
devices or hosts are present.
.PP
The transports that are currently recognized are: IEEE 1394, ATA, FC,
iSCSI, SAS, SATA, SPI, SRP and USB.
.PP
For IEEE 1394 (a.k.a. Firewire and "SBP" when storage is involved), the
EUI\-64 based target port name is output when \fI\-\-transport\fR is given,
in the absence of the \fI\-\-hosts\fR option. When the \fI\-\-hosts\fR
option is given then the EUI\-64 initiator port name is output. Output on
the summary line specific to the IEEE 1394 transport is prefixed by "sbp:".
.PP
To detect ATA and SATA devices a crude check is performed on the driver
name (after the checks for other transports are exhausted). Based on the
driver name either the ATA or SATA transport type is chosen. Output on
the summary line is either "ata:" or "sata:". A search is made for an
associated vpd_pg83 file in sysfs, if found it may contain the device's
WWN which is output if present. The WWN will not appear in Linux kernels
before 3.15 and with old PATA and SATA devices. Most device and hosts
flagged as "ata:" will use the parallel ATA transport (PATA). For SATA
devices that are attached via a SAS expander, see the SAS paragraph below.
.PP
For Fibre Channel (FC) the port name and port identifier are output
when \fI\-\-transport\fR is given. In the absence of the \fI\-\-hosts\fR
option these ids will be for the target port associated with the
device (logical unit) being listed. When the \fI\-\-hosts\fR option is
given then the ids are for the initiator port used by the host. Output
on the summary line specific to the FC transport is prefixed by "fc:".
If FCoE (over Ethernet) is detected the prefix is changed to "fcoe:".
.PP
For iSCSI the target port name is output when \fI\-\-transport\fR is given,
in the absence of the \fI\-\-hosts\fR option. This is made up of the
iSCSI name and the target portal group tag. Since the iSCSI name starts
with "iqn" no further prefix is used. When the \fI\-\-hosts\fR option
is given then only "iscsi:" is output on the summary line.
.PP
For Serial Attached SCSI the SAS address of the target port (or initiator
port if \fI\-\-hosts\fR option is also given) is output. This will be a naa\-5
address. For SAS HBAs and SAS targets (such as SAS disks and tape drives)
the SAS address will be world wide unique. For SATA disks attached to a
SAS expander, the expander provides the SAS address by adding a non zero
value to its (i.e. the expander's) SAS address (e.g. expander_sas_address +
phy_id + 1). SATA disks directly attached to SAS HBAs seem to have an
indeterminate SAS address. Output on the summary line specific to the SAS
transport is prefixed by "sas:".
.PP
For SATA devices, see the paragraph above on ATA devices. As noted in the
previous paragraph, SATA devices attached to SAS expanders will display a
manufactured SAS transport address (manufactured by the expander) rather
than the SATA device's WWN.
.PP
For the SCSI Parallel Interface (SPI) the target port identifier (usually
a number between 0 and 15 inclusive) is output when \fI\-\-transport\fR is
given, in the absence of the \fI\-\-hosts\fR option. When the \fI\-\-hosts\fR
option is given then only "spi:" is output on the summary line.
.PP
For the PCIe transport (a.k.a. PCI Express) there at two possible storage
types: NVMe and SOP/PQI (SCSI over PCIe). There are very few examples of the
latter currently so this utility concentrates on NVMe. NVMe uses its own
command set and not SCSI but has many things in common. Rather than
re\-invent everything currently in use that SCSI has accumulated over nearly
40 years, NVMe is beginning to use some parts of SCSI. A recent example is
the SES\-3 standard for enclosure management which has been adopted by NVMe.
In SCSI a SES device is a logical unit with a peripheral device type (PDT)
of 0xd (for enclosure) so it will appear when the lsscsi utility is invoked
without any options. In NVMe is seems that an enclosure with appear as
attached to the management interface (MI) of a NVMe controller. This means
it should appear when "lsscsi \-\-hosts" is invoked. It is unclear whether
such a NVMe controller can have any storage namespaces associated with
it. The sg_ses utility (in the sg3_utils package) can then be given that NVMe
controller's device name (e.g. /dev/nmve1).
.br
When the \fI\-\-transport\fR option is given, after "pcie" the NVMe
controller's subsystem vendor id and device id are output, separated by a
colon (e.g. "pcie 0x8086:0x390a").
.PP
For the SCSI RDMA Protocol (SRP) the IB (InfiniBand) port's GUID is given.
As an example, it has a form like this: 0002:c903:00fa:abcd .
.PP
When a USB transport is detected, the summary line will contain "usb:"
followed by a USB device name. The USB device name has the
form "<b>\-<p1>[.<p2>[.<p3>]]:<c>.<i>" where <b> is the USB bus number, <p1>
is the port on the host. <p2> is a port on a host connected hub, if present.
If needed <p3> is a USB hub port closer to the USB storage device. <c>
refers to the configuration number while <i> is the interface number. There
is a separate SCSI host for each USB (SCSI) target. A USB SCSI target may
contain multiple logical units. Thus the same "usb: <device_name>" string
appears for a USB SCSI host and all logical units that belong to the USB
SCSI target associated with that USB SCSI host.
.SH LUNS
For historical reasons and as used by several other Unix based Operating
Systems, Linux uses a tuple of integers to describe (a path to) a SCSI
device (also know as a Logical Unit (LU)). The last element of that tuple
is the so\-called Logical Unit Number (LUN). And originally in SCSI a
LUN was an integer, at first 3 bits long, then 8 then 16 bits. SCSI LUNs
today (SAM\-5 section 4.7) are 64 bits but SCSI standards now consider
a LUN to be an array of 8 bytes.
.PP
Up until 2013, Linux mapped SCSI LUNs to a 32 bit integer by taking the
first 4 bytes of the SCSI LUN and ignoring the last 4 bytes. Linux treated
the first two bytes of the SCSI LUN as a unit (a word) and it became the
least significant 16 bits in the Linux LUN integer. The next two bytes of
the SCSI LUN became the upper 16 bits in the Linux LUN integer. The rationale
for this was to keep commonly used LUNs small Linux LUN integers. The most
common LUN (by far) in SCSI LUN (hex) notation is 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
and this becomes the Linux LUN integer 0. The next most common LUN is
00 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 and this becomes the Linux LUN integer 1.
.PP
In 2013 it is proposed to increase Linux LUNs to a 64 bit integer by extending
the mapping outlined above. In this case all information that is possible
to represent in a SCSI LUN is mapped a Linux LUN (64 bit) integer. And the
mapping can be reversed without losing information.
.PP
This version of the utility supports both 32 and 64 bit Linux LUN integers.
By default the LUN shown at the end of the tuple commencing each line is
a Linux LUN as a decimal integer. When the \fI\-\-lunhex\fR option is given
then the LUN is in SCSI LUN format with the 8 bytes run together, with the
output in hexadecimal and prefixed by '0x'. The LUN is decoded according
to SAM\-5's description and trailing zeros (i.e. digits to the right) are not
shown. So LUN 0 (i.e. 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00) is shown as 0x0000 and
LUN 65 (i.e. 00 41 00 00 00 00 00 00) is shown as 0x0041.
If the \fI\-\-lunhex\fR option is given twice then the full 64 bits (i.e. 16
hexadecimal digits) are shown.
.PP
If the \fI\-\-lunhex\fR option is not given on the command line then the
environment variable LSSCSI_LUNHEX_OPT is checked. If LSSCSI_LUNHEX_OPT is
present then its associated value becomes the number of times the
\fI\-\-lunhex\fR is set internally. So, for
example, 'LSSCSI_LUNHEX_OPT=2  lsscsi' and 'lsscsi \-xx' are equivalent.
.SH ORDER OF SCSI IDENTIFIERS
This section only applies to the \fI\-\-scsi_id\fR option and only for
disk like devices (e.g. not tapes nor enclosures). There are potentially
several SCSI identifiers and from revision 164 they are checked in the
following order and only the first found is output.
.PP
The SCSI identifier preference order is:
.PP
  \fB3\fR : NAA based (Network address Authority)
.PP
  \fB2\fR : EUI\-64 based
.PP
  \fB8\fR : SCSI name string (e.g. iSCSI: iqn.1998\-01.com.zzware.iscsi:name1)
.PP
  \fBS\fR : serial number from SCSI VPD page 0x80
.PP
  \fB1\fR : T10 Vendor Identifier
.PP
  \fB0\fR : Vendor Specific
.br
Those numbers prefixing each entry are the SCSI 'Designator Types' found
in the definition of the Device Identification VPD page (0x83) in SPC\-3,
SPC\-4 and SPC\-5. The 'S' of course if not a number and it refers to
a different VPD page: the Serial Number VPD page (0x80).
.PP
There is a more general \fI\-\-wwn\fR option that should apply to almost all
devices. The term "WWN" (world\-wide name) comes from the ATA and NVMe
standards and corresponds to the "Logical Unit (LU) name" in SCSI. The LU
name in SCSI tends to change by transport. For SAS the LU name is the LU's
NAA identifier.
.PP
Plus there the \fI\-\-unit\fR and the \fI\-\-long\-unit\fR options that may
be helpful in uniquely identifying storage devices.
.SH SYSFS VPD PAGES
Most of the numerical identifiers (and iSCSI url type strings) come from the
SCSI INQUIRY command's Device Identification VPD (vital product data) page.
It is one of many VPD pages. These VPD pages are essentially constant (they
can be changed in extraordinary situations) and are read by the SCSI
subsystem when a SCSI device is attached to the system. Modern versions of
Linux make copies of those vpd pages available in the sysfs pseudo file
system. They are binary files with names like "vpd_pg83" where 83 is the
numerical identifier of the Device Identification VPD page (in hex).
.PP
The sg_inq and sg_vpd utilities in the sg3_utils package can decode those
pages. Currently VPD pages 00 (list of supported VPD pages), 80 (serial
number), 83 (device identification (DI)) and 89 (ATA Information) are
available.  More pages may appear in the future. Root permissions are
not required to access these pages. Using sg_vpd with dev/sg3 as an
example, the following invocation will decode sg3's DI page:
.PP
  sg_vpd \-\-raw \-\-inhex=/sys/class/scsi_generic/sg3/device/vpd_pg83
.PP
which can be shortened to:
.PP
  sg_vpd \-rI /sys/class/scsi_generic/sg3/device/vpd_pg83
.PP
Note that the DI VPD page contains identifiers for both a device (a
Logical Unit (LU) in SCSI jargon) and the target device that contains
that LU. A target may contain one or more LUs and LUs are often disks.
A target is the (far) endpoint of the transport protocol in use, while
the initiator is the near end of that transport.
.SH EXAMPLES
Information about this utility including examples can also be found at:
https://sg.danny.cz/scsi/lsscsi.html .
.SH INTRODUCTION TO USB\-C PD
Here are some USB\-C PD basics. The plan is that only one type of cable will
be needed: a USB-C male to male cable with up to 24 pins carrying power and
data from one end to the other. Since the pins are so small, four or more
pins are used to carry power which could be as large as 240 Watts (48 Volts
at 5 Amps DC).
.PP
USB-C Power Delivery (PD) has almost nothing to do with the rest of USB,
time to forget about "hosts" and "devices" and instead think about "sources"
and "sinks". Since USB PD revision 2, both sources and sinks may not be "USB
Communication Capable" which means possibly no D+ or D- and no "superspeed"
signals.
.PP
USB PD signalling takes place over the CC line (Configuration Control) which
not only determines which end is the PD source and which is the PD sink, but
also things like Alternate mode (e.g. for carrying DisplayPort over USB-C).
In the USB-C receptacle (e.g. the socket on the side of a laptop), there are
two CC lines called CC1 and CC2. In the mating USB-C plug (e.g. one end of a
USB-C male to male cable) the same two lines are called CC and Vconn. Why
aren't the same names used? That is part of the excitement with reversible
cables! USB-C PD cables are reversible in two sense: each plug can be taken
out and rotated 180 degrees and re\-inserted; the other sense is that each
end of the cable is the same, so the cable ends can be switched around.
For naming the PD relevant lines, it is best to think about CC and Vconn, CC
goes from one end of the USB-C cable to the other while Vconn powers the
so\-called Emarker chip (required for cables that can carry more than 3 Amps)
and retimer chips needed in cables that can carry Superspeed data (e.g. 5,
10 and 20 Gbps). The most basic USB-C male to male cables don't need Vconn.
.PP
A USB\-C PD source provides power, delivered between the Ground pins and the
VBus pins. There are four of each (i.e. pins) while Ground may also be
carried on the outer shield in the cable which is connected to the outer
shell in USB\-C plugs and receptacles. Notice that the USB-C plug (male)
shell fits snugly inside the USB-C receptacle (female connector)
.PP
In the absence of USB-C PD intelligence (i.e. computer protocols), resistors
are used to determine which end is a USB-C source and which is a USB-C sink.
A major difference between USB\-C PD and earlier generations is that no
voltage will be present on Vbus (hence no power) unless those resistors
(or PD protocol) identify one end as a source and the other end as a sink.
So if two USB\-C PD sources (e.g. AC power adapters) are connected via
a male to male cable, no power will flow. Power banks which can both source
power and sink power (e.g. when its battery is being recharged) either
need separate USB\-C PD receptacles with at least one for charging, or, as
is more common now, need DRP USB\-C ports (receptacles). Dual Role
Power (DRP) means that a port can be switched from a sink to a source (or
vice-versa) under protocol control. There is a related term call DRD
for Dual Role Data in which one end can specify whether it is a USB Host
or USB Device. When resistors are determining which is source or sink,
the source is assumed to be a USB Host and the sink is assumed to be a USB
device. This matches what previous generations of USB did.
.PP
DRP can cause issues for any devices that doesn't have its own battery.
A USB hub would be an example of this, especially "docks" available for
many high end laptops. If a power adapter (connected to the host AC
supply) connected to the hub suddenly loses power (e.g. a blackout) then
the hub will reset while the laptop can switch to its internal battery.
Any USB device (even self powered ones) connected to the hub will lose
its connection to the laptop only to re-connect a short while later. But
the damage may already have been done. If the hub detects the AC power
reducing, it could request the laptop to do a "Fast Role Swap" (FRS) during
which the laptop goes from being a sink to a source without dropping the
Vbus voltage.
.PP
USB-C PD revision 1 is dead, curiously it tried to send the CC signal
modulated over the Vbus line, an experiment that failed in the real world.
So USB-C PD revision 2 dropped support for USB A and B (i.e. previous
generations of USB) and only supported USB\-C which has a dedicated CC
line for the PD protocol traffic. USB-C Revision 2 also introduced
power output up 100 Watts or 60 Watts for cables that were not Emarked
and thus could not carry more than 3 Amps. Fixed voltages of 5 Volts,
9 Volts, 15 Volts and 20 Volts were introduced, the higher ones one if
the output power was greater than a certain level. So the maximum power
was 100 Watts using 20 Volts at 5 Amps with a suitable cable. Notice
that 12 Volts was not required but is provided by many power adapters.
.PP
USB-C PD revision 3.0 introduced the "Programmable Power Supply"
feature (PPS) in which the sink requests a range of voltages (e.g. 3.3
to 11 Volts)
at an operating current. The source would initially try to provide the
highest voltage but if the current draw exceeded the specified operating
current then the source would reduce the voltage until an equilibrium
point was reached. The is called current limiting (CL) or constant
current (CC) mode but the abbreviation CC is obviosly confusing. The
CL function in the PD source is typically done via hardware which is
typically a bit safer (and faster) than doing it with software. That
type of CL is very useful for charging Lithium Ion batteries


Information for this command is derived from the sysfs file system,
which is assumed to be mounted at /sys unless specified otherwise
by the user.
SCSI (pseudo) devices that have been detected by the SCSI mid level
will be listed even if the required upper level drivers (i.e. sd, sr,
st, osst or ch) have not been loaded. If the appropriate upper level
driver has not been loaded then the device file name will appear
as '\-' rather than something like '/dev/st0'. Note that some
devices (e.g. scanners and medium changers) do not have a primary upper
level driver and can only be accessed via a SCSI generic (sg) device
name.
.PP
Generic SCSI devices can also be accessed via the bsg driver in Linux.
By default, the bsg driver's device node names are of the
form '/dev/bsg/\fIH:C:T:L\fR'. So, for example, the SCSI device shown by this
utility on a line starting with the tuple '6:0:1:2' could be accessed via the
bsg driver with the '/dev/bsg/6:0:1:2' device node name.
.PP
lsscsi version 0.21 or later is required to correctly display SCSI devices
in Linux kernel 2.6.26 (and possibly later) when the
CONFIG_SYSFS_DEPRECATED_V2 kernel option is not defined.
.PP
In Unix, device nodes (e.g. /dev/sdb) are "special" devices that are
either "block" or "char" devices. They also have a "major" and "minor"
numbers and a file name (e.g. "sdb"). The following partial listing should
clarify how these are shown by the ls command in Linux:
.PP
  /dev$ ls -l n*
  crw------- 1 root root 247,   0 Apr 24 16:56 ng0n1
  crw-rw-rw- 1 root root   1,   3 Apr 24 16:56 null
  crw------- 1 root root 248,   0 Apr 29 15:25 nvme0
  brw-rw---- 1 root disk 259,   0 Apr 24 16:56 nvme0n1
  brw-rw---- 1 root disk 259,   1 Apr 24 16:56 nvme0n1p1
  brw-rw---- 1 root disk 259,   2 Apr 24 16:56 nvme0n1p2
.PP
The permissions string (e.g. "crw-rw-rw-") starts with a "c" for a char
device and "b" for a block device. The two numbers separated by comma (and
a few whitespace) are the major and minor numbers respectively. As a general
rule the major number identifies the Linux driver which will handle all
devices that share the same mode (i.e. char or block) and the same major
number. Traditionally Unix major numbers were fixed (e.g. the sg driver
is char device 21) but as Linux grew it was obvious that the "fixed major
number" scheme would not scale. So now device node major numbers are
allocated dynamically (i.e. at bootup) and the mapping between the driver
name and its major number can be found in the output of "/proc/devices".
.PP
Why explain this? The reason is that all SCSI (and ATA) device nodes in
Linux have fixed (i.e. well-known) device major numbers. However NVMe,
which is much newer, has dynamically allocated major numbers. So when a
utility like lsscsi is dealing with NVMe devices and controllers, often
an extra step is required: looking at /proc/devices to determine the
mapping between a driver anme and its major number.
.PP
Also the device node name (and udev can change these to override the
kernel's initial settings) may not always suggest the corresponding
driver name. For the SCSI generic driver, just remove the trailing
number (e.g. device node: /dev/sg37, driver: sg); for SCSI disks the
first two letters are the driver name (e.g. device node: /dev/sdabc,
driver: sd) and for NVMe generic devices the "driver" name
is "nvme-generic" (e.g. device node: /dev/ng2n1, driver: nvme-generic).
Trying to find the nvme-generic driver itself is difficult as it is
a built\-in part of the core nvme driver.
.PP
When a system has been sensibly configured and working properly, this
utility should be able to hide the details in the above paragraphs.
However when things go wrong, the above information may be useful.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Doug Gilbert
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2023 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under the GPL version 2. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B lsscsi_json(8)
.B lspci
.B lsusb
.B lsblk
.B sg_inq, sg_vpd (both in sg3_utils package),
